# English-based African-Caribbean creoles today

**Important employers such as London Transport and the NHS recruited large numbers of West Indians to work in the UK during the post-war boom economy years of the 1950s and 1960s. Important African-Caribbean communities can be found in all large cities, but particularly in theWest Midlands and Greater London. Brixton, probably the first part of London where African-Caribbeans settled, remains the centre of a vibrant community; other important communities can be found in Hackney, Willesden, Lewisham and Peckham. In a survey of London school children conducted in 2000, English-based creoles were the eighth most commonly spoken language in the capital.**

Because English is the official language of the former British West Indies, schools assumed for many years that children needed no additional support. Teachers often thought that the children were simply speaking 'bad English' and explained their inability to cope in terms of low intelligence. Disproportionately large numbers of children were placed in schools for the 'educationally sub-normal'. Canadian schools, in contrast, offered special provision in English as a second dialect for African-Caribbean children arriving in the 1980s.By the time that educators were aware of the systematic differences between English-based creoles and British English, most children were bidialectal, able to switch between the local British dialect and the creole. The distinctive speech of second and third generation children which incorporates many features of Caribbean creoles is essentially a marker of their black British identity.One of the ways in which English-based creoles have had a real impact on the wider population is through the lyrics of African-Caribbean music which, in its many and varied forms, has inspired not only African-Caribbeans but people from a wide range of backgrounds. Other significant African-Caribbean cultural contributions include the [**Notting Hill Carnival**](https://www.bbc.co.uk/go/voices/multilingual/creole.shtml/ext/_auto/-/http:/www.nottinghillcarnival.org.uk/), an event which has grown from a small procession in costume in 1964 to a huge multicultural arts festival, attended by up to two million people.

**The history of African-Caribbean Creoles**

Slaves speaking a wide range of languages were forcibly transported from West Africa to the Caribbean and Americas from the sixteenth century. In the early stages, a pidgin with simplified grammar and limited vocabulary allowed them to communicate in a basic way among themselves. Over time, parents started using the pidgin with their children who, in turn, played a crucial role in expanding the grammar and vocabulary into a creole - a full-blown language, that met all the communication needs of its speakers. Although creole is the term preferred by linguists, most people refer to their language as 'patwa'.

Most of the creoles spoken in the former British territories are described as 'English-based' because English is the main source of their vocabulary. There are subtle differences between the various English-based creoles, but all are mutually intelligible. There are also French-based creoles in St Lucia and Dominica and other islands colonized by France, and Spanish- and Dutch-based creoles in former Spanish and Dutch territories. There are, however, striking similarities between the grammar of creoles not only in the Caribbean but in many other parts of the world. The linguistic situation in the Caribbean can best be described in terms of a continuum with broad Creole at one end and standard English at the other. Factors such as social class and education determine where on the continuum a speaker is located. Equally important, the speech of the same person will vary a great deal depending on the subject of the conversation and the person they are talking to.

Until quite recently, African Caribbean creoles were written down only occasionally. Today, they appear more regularly in print, for instance, in poems, songs lyrics on CD inserts and for first person narrative in novels. There are established orthographies for writing the French-based creoles of St Lucia and Haiti. However, there is no standardized spelling for the English-based creoles.