# Societies and Cultures of the English-Speaking World The Outer CircleWest Africa

**Cameroon**, formerly a German protectorate, was divided between France and Britain in 1919. As a result, both French and English are its official languages, while a number of indigenous are spoken in the country as well.

**The Gambia** is the smallest state in Africa. English is the official language of the country, but various African languages are used as first languages by the people of the Gambia.

**Ghana** was the first former West African colony to become an independent state in 1957. It encompasses the former British colony of the Gold Coast and the former British Togoland trust territory. English is the official language of the country and the second language of at least a million Ghanaians. A large number of African languages, such as Akan and Hausa, are used as first languages by the population of Ghana.

**Liberia** was founded by the American Colonization Society as a home for freed American slaves, later known as Americo-Liberians. Founded in 1847, it is the oldest republic in Africa. Despite pressures from various European nations, it never became a colony. Today, about 5% of the population are the descendants of freed slaves. The culture of the Americo-Liberians was very different from the local African cultures. Until the 1980 coup, the Americo-Liberians constituted the ruling class in the country. English is the official language in Liberia, although a number of African languages are also spoken in the country. Since Liberia was never a British colony, but has always maintained strong ties with the USA, it is not surprising that Liberian English has strong ties with American rather than British English.

**Nigeria** is the most populous country in Africa. Different parts of present-day Nigeria were colonized by the British between 1861 and 1906, and Nigeria became a single colony in 1914. The country achieved independence in 1960. Over 400 African languages are spoken in Nigeria, but English is the official language of the country, and a form of pidgin English is often used as a lingua franca.

**Sierra Leone** was founded by British abolitionists in the late 18<sup>th</sup> century to provide a new home for freed slaves. It became a British colony in early 19<sup>th</sup> century and gained independence in 1961. Although English is the official language of the country, the West African English-based creole Krio, which originally developed in this West African country, is the most important language in the country, used in all spheres of public life. Approximately 10% of the population are native speakers of Krio, and over 90 % of the people use it as their second language. A number of African languages are also spoken in Sierra Leone.