## Work: July's People

**Author:** Nadine Gordimer

**Period label:** Apartheid-era South African literature

**Period/movement article:** South African literature

**Source:** https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/July's_People

**Page history / contributors:** https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=July's_People&action=history


July's People is a 1981 novel by the South African writer Nadine Gordimer. It is set in a near-future version of South Africa where apartheid is ended through a civil war. Unlike Gordimer's earlier work, the novel was ignored by the apartheid government's censor, though the book's South African publisher was later raided by the Security Branch.


== Plot ==
The novel is set during a fictional civil war in which black South Africans have violently overturned the system of apartheid. The story follows the Smales, a liberal White South African family who were forced to flee Johannesburg to the native village of their black servant, July.
Maureen tries working with the women in the fields, digging up leaves and roots. Afterwards, she goes to see July, who is working on the bakkie.
When July says she should not work with the women, she asks if he fears she will tell his wife about Ellen, his mistress or "town wife." He angrily asserts that she can only tell Martha that he has always been a good servant. Maureen, frightened, realizes that the dignity she thought she had always conferred upon him was actually humiliating to him. He informs her that he and the Smales have been summoned to the chief's village. Though July has authority in his village, they still must ask the chief's permission to stay. Maureen struggles with her new subservience to July.
After Gina goes to play with Nyiko and Bam goes with Victor and Royce to fish, a helicopter with unidentifiable markings flies over the village. Maureen runs toward it but what happens after that is unclear.


== Reception ==
Anne Tyler, writing for The New York Times, praised the novel, saying that Gordimer "has outdone herself" and that the work was "So flawlessly written that every one of its events seems chillingly, ominously possible". In his book Frantz Fanon and the Future of Cultural Politics: Finding Something Different, Anthony C. Alessandrini referred to Tyler's take on the novel as "maddening" given that the "events" she describes result in the fall of apartheid.


=== Controversy ===
July's People was temporarily banned from schools in Gauteng Province, in South Africa, for a brief period in 2001. The government of Gauteng Province provided the following reason for the ban:

The subject matter is questionable ... the language that is used is not acceptable, as it does not encourage good grammatical practices ... the reader is bombarded with nuances that do not achieve much ... any condemnation of racism is difficult to discover - so the story comes across as being deeply racist, superior and patronising.
The book was banned alongside other books, including several Shakespeare plays, among them Julius Caesar and Othello.


== Plot ==
In South Africa under apartheid, Mehring is a rich white businessman who is not satisfied with his life. His ex-wife has gone to America, his liberal son, Terry (who is probably gay) criticizes his conservative/capitalist ways, and his lovers and colleagues do not actually seem interested in him. On a whim he buys a 400-acre farm outside the city, afterwards trying to explain this purchase to himself as the search for a higher meaning in life. But it is clear that he knows next to nothing about farming, and that black workers run it – Mehring is simply an outsider, an intruder on the daily life of "his" farm. His objective in buying the farm is to make a tax deductible expense. "No farm is beautiful unless it's productive," says Mehring. Plus it is proper for his amorous escapades. Land was a thing of his race. He once visits his farm with his girlfriend, Antonia.
One day the black foreman, Jacobus, finds an unidentified dead body on the farm. Since the dead man is black, the police find no urgency to look into the case and simply bury the body on the spot where it was found. The idea of an unknown black man buried on his land begins to "haunt" Mehring. A flood brings the body back to the surface; although the farm workers do not know the stranger, they now give him a proper burial as if he were a family member. There are hints that Mehring's own burial will be less emotional than this burial of a stranger.


== Characters ==
Mehring, the protagonist, an antihero of the novel. In his middle age, he is an attractive figure and has already had a number of mistresses. He is a frequent traveller and a calculating businessman.
Antonia Mancebo, the mistress of Mehring with olive complexion and dark hair. She is a revolutionary activist and has often a brush with law. She has to leave Africa as her life is in danger.
Terry, son of Mehring who has left him long ago.
Jabobus, works as a foreman at Mehring's farm. He breaks the news of the dead body to Mehring.


== Theme ==
Political and resurrection themes are combined to convey a larger meaning. The sterility of white has been depicted in Mehring's attempts of keeping his farm. He tries to conserve both nature and apartheid, while nature fails him and doesn't return what he had given to it. The dead body laying claim to his land is the embodiment of Africa, having no land of its own while in fact possessing all of Africa.


== Critical reception ==
In November 1974, the novel was named the joint winner of the 1974 Booker Prize in England. Gordimer shared the prize with Stanley Middleton for Holiday.
Sam Jordison wrote about the novel for The Guardian in 2008: "Every stone on the ground, every step on the way, every gesture and unguarded word is rich with meaning. Her trick is to show us only what Mehring himself encounters, but ensure that we see far more (in the Conradian sense). She presents a world refracted through Mehring's eyes and interpreted in his internal monologues, but our view of it, over the course of the book, changes radically." Jordison continues: "This double-edged writing constantly jabs at our conscience. Sometimes, it's a matter of just one or two words, dropped casually into conversations, or scattered around visual descriptions."
Stephen Clingman, writing for The Conversation in 2014, described the novel as Gordimer's "masterpiece."


== Plot ==
The novel begins with a newspaper clipping about the death of Mary Turner, a white woman, killed by her black servant, Moses. The bulk of the novel is the story of Mary's life.
After a loveless, wretched childhood, Mary is contented with her life as an office worker in a city in Rhodesia. But, after overhearing her friends laugh at her as sexless and immature, she resolves to marry, and when Dick Turner asks her she consents, though she has met him only twice. Dick is also in a hurry to wed, because he is very lonely and unhappy clawing a bare living from a subsistence farm and living in a bare, ugly little house. From the beginning, they are distant and cold, but, except when Mary briefly runs away, fear of loneliness and lack of money keep them together. When Mary becomes involved in the running of the farm, she realizes that its failure is not down to bad luck, as Dick keeps telling her, but his incompetence. This distances her even more from him. Their white neighbors make overtures of friendship, but, out of shame at her poverty, Mary rejects them. The Turners' barren existence is contrasted with the fierce beauty of the land, to which they are oblivious.
The natives, whom Dick employs on the farm, are a further source of tension. Black people have never been part of Mary's world, and she treats them with frigid contempt. They have difficulty keeping a servant until Dick assigns his best field hand, Moses, to the house. What he does not know is that the weal on Moses' face is there because Mary, enraged at what she considered insolence, struck him with a whip. As the farm deteriorates, the three of them are locked into an elaborate dance of intimacy, despair, and, finally, death.


== Title and epigraph ==
The title of the novel is a phrase from T. S. Eliot's The Waste Land, which appears at line 386 of "What the Thunder Said", part V of the poem:

Despite the section's theme of the power of destruction over growth, it is one of the more jubilant and reviving images used in "What the Thunder Said". Fifteen lines from this section of The Waste Land are quoted to begin the novel, forming its epigraph, to which is added the epigrammatic quotation: "It is by the failures and misfits of a civilization that one can best judge its weaknesses", an aphorism from an unstated source.


== Adaptations ==
The book was adapted into a movie in 1981 by a Swedish company. Filmed in Livingstone and other locations of Zambia, the film stars John Thaw, Karen Black and John Kani. It is also known under the titles, Swedish: Gräset Sjunger and Killing Heat.


== Publication history ==
The first American edition was published in 1950 by Thomas Y. Crowell Co. The first American paperback edition was in 1964, from Ballantine Books. The novel was also republished in 1973 in the influential Heinemann African Writers Series.


== Plot summary ==
The Golden Notebook is the story of writer Anna Wulf, the four notebooks in which she records her life, and her attempt to tie them together in a fifth, gold-coloured notebook.
The book intersperses segments of an ostensibly realistic narrative of the lives of Anna and her friend Molly Jacobs as well as their children, ex-husbands and lovers—entitled Free Women—with excerpts from Anna's four notebooks, coloured black (of Anna's experience in Southern Rhodesia, before and during World War II, which inspired her own best-selling novel), red (of her experience as a member of the Communist Party), yellow (an ongoing novel that is being written based on the painful ending of Anna's own love affair), and blue (Anna's personal journal where she records her memories, dreams, and emotional life).
Each notebook is returned to four times, interspersed with episodes from Free Women, creating non-chronological, overlapping sections that interact with one another.


== Major themes ==
Lessing, in her preface, claimed that the most important theme in the novel is fragmentation; the mental breakdown that Anna suffers, perhaps from the compartmentalization of her life reflected in the division of the four notebooks but also reflecting the fragmentation of society. Anna's relationship and attempt to draw everything together in the golden notebook at the end of the novel are both the final stage of her intolerable mental breakdown, and her attempt to overcome the fragmentation and madness.


== Author's comments ==
In a 1994 interview by the New York Times  Lessing said she found The Golden Notebook's fate mystifying. Its enduring success surprised her, and the feminist movement it helped to spawn disappoints and frustrates her.  "There was this explosion of energy with feminism, but what happened is, they talked their energy away," Mrs. Lessing says. "Things have changed for white, middle-class women, but nothing has changed outside this group."
She recalled a "very dramatic little scene" during one of her visits back to Zimbabwe after 25 years of banishment as a "prohibited immigrant" for her criticism of apartheid: "There were a couple of American feminists, expertly dressed, lecturing a bunch of women who were raising kids on a level of about $70 to $80 a month in American money, about their sex lives, how to raise their children, how to treat their husbands." The feminists struck her as latter-day ideological imperialists, liberated most of all, she says, from "a sense of the ridiculous."


== Characters ==
Anna (Freeman) Wulf:  Writer.  Main character of Free Women and writer of the notebooks.
Max Wulf:  Anna's ex-husband
Janet Wulf:  Anna and Max's daughter
Molly Jacobs:  Actress, Anna's friend.
Richard Portmain:  Molly's ex-husband
Tommy Portmain:  Molly's -- and Richard's -- son
Marion Portmain:  Richard's second wife
Michael:  Anna's former lover
Willi (Wilhelm) Rodde (Black Notebook):  Anna's boyfriend, refugee from Germany, based on Max Wulf.
Paul Blackenhurst (Black Notebook):  Royal Air Force Pilot
Ted Brown (Black Notebook):  Royal Air Force pilot, socialist.
Jimmy McGrath (Black Notebook):  Royal Air Force pilot.  Homosexual.
George Hounslow (Black Notebook):  Worked on roads.
Maryrose (Black Notebook):  Paul and George's love interest, born in Southern Rhodesia
Mr Boothby (Black Notebook):  Proprietor of the Mashopi Hotel
Mrs Boothby (Black Notebook):  Proprietor of the Mashopi Hotel
June Boothby (Black Notebook):  Daughter of Mr & Mrs Boothby
Jackson (Black Notebook):  Cook at the Mashopi Hotel.  Friend of Jimmy.
Marie (Black Notebook):  Jackson's wife.  Has an affair with George.
Ella (Yellow Notebook):  Based on Anna Wulf. Writes for a women's magazine.
Julia (Yellow Notebook):  Based on Molly Jacobs
Dr West (Yellow Notebook):  Writes a medical column under the name Dr Allsop for the women's magazine.
Patricia Brent (Yellow Notebook): Editor
George (Yellow Notebook):  Based on Max Wulf
Paul Tanner (Yellow Notebook):  Ella's lover
Michael (Yellow Notebook):  Ella's son
Saul Green (Blue and Golden Notebooks):  American writer (Clancy Sigal, in real life)
Milt (Free Women 5):  American writer (= Saul Green from the Blue and Golden Notebooks)
Mother Sugar (Mrs Marks):  Anna and Molly's psychoanalyst
Tom Mathlong (Free Women):  African political activist
Charlie Themba (Free Women 4):  Trade union leader, friend of Tom Mathlong


== Translations ==
Translations include:

Le Carnet d'or (éditions Albin Michel, 1976) ISBN 978-2070298327 [French].
Il taccuino d'oro (Feltrinelli, 1989) ISBN 88-07-80784-X [Italian].
Den femte sanningen, trans. by Mårten Edlund (1964) [Swedish].
Az arany jegyzetfüzet, trans. by Tábori Zoltán (Ulpius-ház, 2008), ISBN 978-963-254-210-2 [Hungarian].
מחברת הזהב (Am Oved, 1978), ISBN 978-2-226-00340-9, ISBN 978-0-7181-0970-7 [Hebrew].
"Złoty notes", trans. by Bohdan Maliborski (2014) ISBN 978-83-64142-79-6 [Polish].


== Plot ==
Nwokocha Agbadi is a proud, handsome and wealthy local chief. Although he has many wives, he finds a woman named Ona more attractive. Ona ("priceless jewel") is the name he has given her, the daughter of a fellow chief.
When she was young, her father took her everywhere he went, saying she was his ornament, and Nwokocha Agbadi would say jokingly in response, "Why don't you wear her around your neck like an Ona?" It never occurred to him that he would be one of the men to later ask for her when she grew up.
During one rainy season Chief Agbadi and his friends go elephant hunting and having come too near the heavy creature, the chief is thrown with a mighty tusk into a nearby sugar-cane bush and is pinned to the floor. He aims his spear at the belly of the mighty animal and kills it but not until it has wounded him badly. Agbadi passes out and was thought to have died, instead, he wakes up after several days to find Ona beside him.
During his period of recovery, he sleeps with her, and shortly thereafter he finds out that his senior wife Agunwa is very ill. She later dies, and it is thought that, perhaps, she became ill as a result of seeing her husband making love to Ona on his apparent deathbed.
The funeral festivities continue through the day. When it is time to put Agunwa in her grave, everything she will need in her afterlife having been placed in her coffin, her personal slave is called. According to custom, a good slave is supposed to jump into the grave willingly to accompany her mistress but this young and beautiful slave begs for her life, much to the annoyance of the men. The hapless slave is pushed into the shallow grave but struggles out, appealing to her owner Agbadi, whose eldest son cries angrily: "So my mother does not deserve a decent burial?" So saying, he gives her a sharp blow with the head of the cutlass. Another relative gives her a final blow to the head and she falls into the grave, silenced forever. The burial is then completed.
Ona becomes pregnant from sleeping with Agbadi and delivers a baby girl named Nnu Ego ("twenty bags of cowries"). The baby is born with a mark on her head resembling that made by the cutlass used on the head of the slave woman. Later, Ona gives birth to another son, but she dies in premature labour and her son also dies a day afterwards.
Meanwhile, Nnu Ego becomes a woman but is seemingly barren. After several months with no sign of fruitfulness, she consults several herbalists and is told that the slave woman who is her Chi (or patron goddess) will not give her a child. Her husband Amatokwu takes another wife who, before long, conceives.
Nnu Ego returns to her father's house. She is married, sight unseen, to a new husband who lives in Lagos; so she journeys from her village to the city where she meets her new husband, Nnaife, whom she does not like but, otherwise, prays that, if she can conceive a child with him, she will love him. Some time afterward, she does give birth to a baby boy, whom she later finds dead.
Shocked, she is on the verge of jumping into the river when a villager draws her back and comforts her. Over the course of her life, she gives birth to nine surviving children.
At some point, Nnaife, a laundryman for a white man, is drafted into the army during wartime, but, on her own, Nnu Ego can barely manage to feed them.
Nnu Ego returns to the village, where she is feted as a great woman because with two married daughters, and two sons abroad (the second son emigrates to Canada), she is expected to be filled with the joys of motherhood.
It is suggested that her children's success should be enough for her, instead, she dies a lonely death in the village, and is regarded as a madwoman.
Only after her death do her children arrive to throw a lavish funeral for her; they spend time and money on her funeral, which they did not spend in her life.
It is noted that Nnu Ego never gives children to women who pray to her for them.


== Critical reception ==
The reviewer for West Africa magazine wrote: "Buchi Emecheta has a way of making readable and interesting ordinary events. She looks at things without flinching and without feeling the need to distort or exaggerate. It is a remarkable talent.... this is, in my opinion, the best novel Buchi Emecheta has yet written." A. N. Wilson stated in The Observer: "Buchi Emecheta has a growing reputation for her treatment of African women and their problems. This reputation will surely be enhanced by The Joys of Motherhood."


== Plot ==
Death and the King's Horseman builds upon the true story on  which Soyinka based the play, to focus on the character of Elesin, the King's Horseman of the title. According to some Yoruba traditions, the death of the king must be followed by the ritual suicide of the king's horseman as well as the king's dog and horse, because the horseman's spirit is essential to helping the King's spirit ascend to the afterlife.  Otherwise, the king's spirit will wander the earth and bring harm to his people. The first half of the play documents the process of this ritual, with the potent, life-loving figure Elesin living out his final day in celebration before the ritual process begins. At the last minute, the local colonial administrator, Simon Pilkings, intervenes, the suicide being viewed as illegal and unnecessary by the colonial authorities.
In the play, the result for the community is catastrophic, as the breaking of the ritual means the disruption of the cosmic order of the universe and thus the well-being and future of the collectivity is in doubt. The community blames Elesin as much as Pilkings, accusing him of being too attached to the earth to fulfil his spiritual obligations. Events lead to tragedy when Elesin's son, Olunde, who has returned to Nigeria from studying medicine in Europe, takes on the responsibility of his father and commits ritual suicide in his place so as to restore the honour of his family and the order of the universe. Consequently, Elesin kills himself, condemning his soul to a degraded existence in the next world. In addition, the dialogue of the native suggests that this may have been insufficient and that the world is now "adrift in the void".
Another Nigerian playwright, Duro Ladipo, had already written a play in the Yoruba language based on this incident, called Oba waja ("The King is Dead").


== Themes and motifs ==
Duty
Anti-colonialism is considered a theme by some scholars based on aspects of the text, but Soyinka specifically calls the intervention by the colonial administrator "an incident, a catalytic incident merely" in the "Author's Note" prepended to the play.


=== Yoruba proverbs ===
Almost every character in Death and the King's Horseman at some point uses a traditional Yoruba proverb.  Through his vast knowledge of Yoruba proverbs, Soyinka is able to endow his play with a strong Yoruba sentiment.
Characters often employ Yoruba proverbs primarily as a means of bolstering their opinions and persuading others to take their point of view.
The Praise-singer gets annoyed with Elesin for his decision to take a new wife and tries to dissuade him:

Because the man approaches a brand-new bride he forgets the long faithful mother of his children.
Ariyawo-ko-iyale
Similarly, Iyaloja tries to admonish Elesin against his earthly attachments and stay true to the ritual upon which the good of his society depended:

Eating the awusa nut is not so difficult as drinking water afterwards.
Ati je asala [awusa] ko to ati mu omi si i.
Another common way in which Soyinka uses proverbs is with Elesin.  Elesin himself uses several proverbs in order to convince his peers that he is going to comply with their ritual and thus join the ancestors in orun:

The kite makes for wide spaces and the wind creeps up behind its tail; can the kite say less than thank you, the quicker the better?
Awodi to'o nre Ibara, efufu ta a n'idi pa o ni Ise kuku ya.
The elephant trails no tethering-rope; that king is not yet crowned who will peg an elephant.
Ajanaku kuro ninn 'mo ri nkan firi, bi a ba ri erin ki a ni a ri erin
The river is never so high that the eyes of a fish are covered.
Odu ki ikun bo eja l'oju
The final way in which proverbs appear in the play is when Iyaloja and the Praise-singer harass Elesin while he is imprisoned for failing to complete his role within the ritual:

What we have no intention of eating should not be held up to the nose.
Ohun ti a ki i je a ki ifif run imu
We said you were the hunter returning home in triumph, a slain buffalo pressing down on his neck; you said wait, I first must turn up this cricket hole with my toes.
A ki i ru eran erin lori ki a maa f'ese wa ire n'ile
The river which fills up before our eyes does not sweep us away in its flood.
Odo ti a t'oju eni kun ki igbe 'ni lo


== Performances ==

Written in five scenes, it is performed without interruption.  Soyinka himself has directed important American productions, in Chicago in 1976 and at Lincoln Center in New York in 1987, but according to Andrew Gumbel, the play "has been much more widely admired than performed".
The British premiere was directed by Phyllida Lloyd at the Royal Exchange Theatre in Manchester in 1990. It starred George Harris and Claire Benedict.
The play was performed at London's Royal National Theatre beginning in April 2009, directed by Rufus Norris, with choreography by Javier de Frutos and starring Lucian Msamati. The play was also staged by the St. Louis Black Repertory Theater February 2008, directed by Olusegun Ojewuyi, who has been dramaturge for the Oregon Shakespeare's production. It was performed at the Oregon Shakespeare Festival from February 14 to July 5, 2009, as well. A Yoruba translation Iku Olokun Esin was also performed at the National Theater, Lagos, Nigeria, directed by Olusegun Ojewuyi (thus making him the first and only director to have staged the play in both English and in Yoruba – the language and culture of the play).
In 2021, it was performed on stage at Terra Kulture, directed by Bolanle Austen-Peters in collaboration with MTN Foundation. It starred Olarotimi Michael Fakunle as Elesin Oba and Mawuyon Ogun as Iyaloja.
In 2021, the Crane Creations Theatre Company had led a Play Date event of Death and the King's Horseman. This monthly play reading is held by a group of professional theatre artists for the purpose of spreading and increasing appreciation of playwrights from around the world.
It was included in the 2022 program of Canada's Stratford Festival, and directed by Tawiah M'Carthy.
In 2025, Utopia Theatre and Sheffield Theatres staged a production from 3-8 February at The Crucible Theatre, Sheffield, directed by Mojisola Kareem, and featuring Wale Ojo as Elesin and Kehinde Bankole as Iyaloja.


== Translations ==
Russian: by Andrey Kistyakovsky, 1987
Yorùbá: by Akinwunmi Ishola, 1994
Yorùbá (for a screen adaptation) by Kola Tubosun, 2022


== Adaptation ==
A film adaptation directed by playwright Biyi Bandele (with screenplay translated into Yorùbá by Nigerian linguist Kola Tubosun) and  co-produced by Netflix and Ebonylife TV titled Elesin Oba, The King's Horseman had its world premier at the Toronto International Film Festival in September 2022. The film stars Odunlade Adekola, Shaffy Bello, Brymo, Deyemi Okanlawon, Omowunmi Dada, Jide Kosoko, Kevin Ushi, Jenny Stead, Mark Elderkin, Langley Kirkwood, Taiwo Ajai-Lycett, and Joke Silva.


== See also ==
Yoruba religion
Yoruba literature
Postcolonial literature
List of Nigerian writers


=== Sources ===
McLuckie, Craig, The Structural Coherence of Wole Soyinka's Death and the King's Horseman, College Literature, Spring 2004.

---
