## Period: Canadian literature

**Used by works:** Lives of Girls and Women, Who Do You Think You Are? (short story collection)

**Source:** https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canadian_literature

**Page history / contributors:** https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Canadian_literature&action=history


Canadian literature is often divided into French- and English-language literatures, which are rooted in the literary traditions of France and Britain, respectively. The earliest Canadian narratives were of travel and exploration. This progressed into three major themes of historical Canadian literature: nature, frontier life, and Canada's position within the world, all of which tie into the garrison mentality.  The evolution of Canadian literature is intricately linked to its historical and social contexts, often mirroring the challenges and triumphs of Canadian society.  As Canadian literature progressed into the 20th and 21st centuries, it began to address a broader array of subjects and themes, such as feminism and LGBTQ rights, immigrant experiences, environmental issues, the relationship with Indigenous peoples, and Canadian values and identity.
Financial support from governmental bodies, such as the Canada Council for the Arts and various provincial grant programs, facilitates the creation, publication, and promotion of works by Canadian authors. Numerous Canadian authors have accumulated international literary awards including the Nobel Prize in Literature, the Booker Prize, and the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction.  Canadian literary prizes include the Governor General's Literary Awards, the Giller Prize, the Atwood Gibson Writers' Trust Fiction Prize,  the Latner Griffin Writers' Trust Poetry Prize, the Burt Award for First Nations, Inuit and Métis Literature and several accolades for literature aimed at children.


== Indigenous literatures ==

Indigenous peoples of Canada are culturally diverse. Each group has its own literature, language and culture. The term "Indigenous literature" therefore can be misleading, as writer Jeannette Armstrong states in one interview,  "I would stay away from the idea of "Native" literature, there is no such thing. There is Mohawk literature, there is Okanagan literature, but there is no generic Native in Canada".


== French-Canadian literature ==

In 1802, the Lower Canada legislative library was founded. All books it contained were subsequently moved to the Canadian parliament in Montreal when the two Canadas, Lower and Upper, were united. On April 25, 1849, the Canadian parliament was burned along with thousands of French Canadian books and a few hundred English books. A consequence of this event was the mistaken impression that from the early settlements until the 1820s, Quebec had virtually no literature.
It was the rise of Quebec patriotism and the 1837 Lower Canada Rebellion, in addition to a modern system of primary school education, which led to the rise of French-Canadian fiction. L'influence d'un livre by Philippe-Ignace-Francois Aubert de Gaspé is widely regarded as the first French-Canadian novel. The genres which first became popular were the rural novel and the historical novel. French authors were influential, especially authors like Balzac.

In 1866, Father Henri-Raymond Casgrain became one of Quebec's first literary theorists. He argued that literature's goal should be to project an image of proper Catholic morality.  However, a few authors like Louis-Honoré Fréchette and Arthur Buies broke the conventions to write more interesting works.
This pattern continued until the 1930s with a new group of authors educated at the Université Laval and the Université de Montréal. Novels with psychological and sociological foundations became the norm. Gabrielle Roy and Anne Hébert even began to earn international acclaim, which had not happened to French-Canadian literature before. During this period, Quebec theatre, which had previously been melodramas and comedies, became far more involved.
French-Canadian literature began to greatly expand with the turmoil of the Second World War, the beginnings of industrialization in the 1950s, and most especially the Quiet Revolution in the 1960s. French-Canadian literature also began to attract a great deal of attention globally, with Acadian novelist Antonine Maillet winning the Prix Goncourt in 1979. An experimental branch of Québécois literature also developed; for instance the poet Nicole Brossard wrote in a formalist style.
In 1979, Roch Carrier wrote the story The Hockey Sweater, which highlighted the cultural and social tensions between English and French speaking Canada.


== Before Confederation ==

Because Canada only officially became a country following the unification, or 'confederation' of several colonies, including Upper and Lower Canada, into one nation on July 1, 1867, it has been argued that literature written before this time was colonial. The book often considered to be the first work of Canadian literature is The History of Emily Montague by Frances Brooke, published in 1769. Brooke wrote the novel in Sillery, Quebec following the Conquest of New France. Susanna Moodie and Catharine Parr Traill, English sisters who adopted the country as their own, moved to Upper Canada in 1832. They recorded their experiences as pioneers in Parr Traill's The Backwoods of Canada (1836) and Canadian Crusoes (1852), and Moodie's Roughing It in the Bush (1852) and Life in the Clearings (1853). However, both women wrote until their deaths, placing them in the country for more than 50 years and certainly well past Confederation. Moreover, their books often dealt with survival and the rugged Canadian environment; these themes re-appear in other Canadian works, including Margaret Atwood's Survival. Moodie and Parr Trail's sister, Agnes Strickland, remained in England and wrote elegant royal biographies, creating a stark contrast between Canadian and English literatures.
However, one of the earliest Canadian writers virtually always included in Canadian literary anthologies is Thomas Chandler Haliburton (1796–1865), born and raised in Nova Scotia, who died just two years before Canada's official birth. He is remembered for his comic character, Sam Slick, who appeared in The Clockmaker and other humorous works throughout Haliburton's life.


== After 1867 ==

A group of poets now known as the "Confederation Poets", including Charles G. D. Roberts, Archibald Lampman, Bliss Carman, Duncan Campbell Scott, and William Wilfred Campbell, came to prominence in the 1880s and 1890s. Choosing the world of nature as their inspiration, their work was drawn from their own experiences and, at its best, written in their own tones. Isabella Valancy Crawford, Annie Campbell Huestis, Frederick George Scott, and Francis Sherman are also sometimes associated with this group.
During this period, E. Pauline Johnson and William Henry Drummond were writing popular poetry – Johnson's based on her part-Mohawk heritage, and Drummond, the Poet of the Habitant, writing dialect verse.
L. M. Montgomery's novel Anne of Green Gables was first published in 1908. It has sold an estimated 50 million copies and is one of the best selling books worldwide. Atlantic Canadian folklore and song became the subject of a Maritime literary revival in the 1920s, centered on Nova Scotia. Folklore collection expressed an interest in the region's pre-industrial lifestyle and a romantic vision of the "hardiness, simplicity, and virtues of the seafaring life". Poets and novelists participating in the literary revival included the Song Fishermen.
Between 1915 and 1925, Stephen Leacock (1869–1944) was the best selling humour writer in the world. His best known book of fiction, Sunshine Sketches of a Little Town was published in 1912.
Three of Canada's most important post-World War I novelists were Hugh MacLennan (1907–1990), W.O. Mitchell (1914–1998), and Morley Callaghan (1903–1990). MacLennan's best-known works are Barometer Rising (1941), The Watch That Ends the Night (1957), and Two Solitudes (1945), while Callaghan is best known for Such Is My Beloved (1934), The Loved and the Lost (1951), and More Joy in Heaven (1937). Mitchell's most-loved novel is Who Has Seen the Wind.
Perhaps reacting against a tradition that largely emphasized the wilderness and the small town and country experience, Leonard Cohen wrote the novel Beautiful Losers (1966). It was labelled by one reviewer "the most revolting book ever written in Canada". In time, however, this novel was considered a Canadian classic. Despite beginning his career as a poet of major importance, Cohen is perhaps best known as a folk singer and songwriter, with an international following.
Canadian author Farley Mowat is best known for his work Never Cry Wolf (1963) and his Governor General's Award-winning children's book, Lost in the Barrens (1956).
Following World War II, writers such as Mavis Gallant, Mordecai Richler, Norman Levine, Sheila Watson, Margaret Laurence and Irving Layton added to the Modernist influence in Canadian literature previously introduced by F. R. Scott, A. J. M. Smith and others associated with the McGill Fortnightly. This influence, at first, was not broadly appreciated. Norman Levine's Canada Made Me, a travelogue that presented a sour interpretation of the country in 1958, for example, was widely rejected.
After 1967, the country's centennial year, the national government increased funding to publishers and numerous small presses began operating throughout the country.
The best-known Canadian children's writers include L. M. Montgomery and Monica Hughes.


== Contemporary Canadian literature: After 1967 ==
Arguably, the best-known living Canadian writer internationally (especially since the deaths of Robertson Davies and Mordecai Richler) is Margaret Atwood, a prolific novelist, poet, and literary critic. Other great 20th-century Canadian authors include Margaret Laurence, Mavis Gallant, Michael Ondaatje, Carol Shields, Alistair MacLeod, Mazo de la Roche, and Gabrielle Roy.

This group, along with Nobel Laureate Alice Munro, who has been called the best living writer of short stories in English, were part of a 'new wave' of Canadian writers, some starting their careers in the 1950s. The first to elevate Canadian Literature to the world stage were Lucy Maud Montgomery, Stephen Leacock, Mazo de la Roche, and Morley Callaghan. During the post-war decades  Canadian literature, as were Australian and New Zealand literature, viewed as an appendage to British Literature. When academic Clara Thomas decided in the 1940s to concentrate on Canadian literature for her master's thesis, the idea was so novel and so radical that word of her decision reached The Globe and Mail books editor William Arthur Deacon, who then personally reached out to Thomas to pledge his and the newspaper's resources in support of her work.

Other major Canadian novelists include Carol Shields, Lawrence Hill, and Alice Munro. Carol Shields' novel The Stone Diaries won the 1995 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction, and another novel, Larry's Party, won the Orange Prize in 1998. Lawrence Hill's Book of Negroes won the 2008 Commonwealth Writers' Prize Overall Best Book Award, while Alice Munro became the first Canadian to win the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2013. Munro also received the Man Booker International Prize in 2009.
In the 1960s, a renewed sense of nation helped foster new voices in Canadian poetry, including: Margaret Atwood, Michael Ondaatje, Leonard Cohen, Eli Mandel and Margaret Avison. Others such as Al Purdy, Milton Acorn, and Earle Birney, already published, produced some of their best work during this period.
The TISH Poetry movement in Vancouver brought about poetic innovation from Jamie Reid, George Bowering, Fred Wah, Frank Davey, Daphne Marlatt, David Cull, and Lionel Kearns.
Canadian poets have been expanding the boundaries of originality: Christian Bök, Ken Babstock, Karen Solie, Lynn Crosbie, Patrick Lane, George Elliott Clarke and Barry Dempster have all imprinted their unique consciousnesses onto the map of Canadian imagery.
A notable anthology of Canadian poetry is The New Oxford book of Canadian Verse, edited by Margaret Atwood (ISBN 0-19-540450-5).
Anne Carson is probably the best known Canadian poet living today. Carson in 1996 won the Lannan Literary Award for poetry. The foundation's awards in 2006 for poetry, fiction and nonfiction each came with $US 150,000.


=== Canadian authors who have won international awards ===
Nobel Prize in Literature

Alice Munro (2013)
International Booker Prize

Alice Munro (2009)
Booker Prize

Michael Ondaatje, The English Patient (1992)
Margaret Atwood, The Blind Assassin (2000)
Yann Martel, Life of Pi (2002)
Margaret Atwood, The Testaments (2019)
Pulitzer Prize for Fiction

Carol Shields, The Stone Diaries  (1995)
National Book Critics Circle Award

Carol Shields, The Stone Diaries  (1994)
International Dublin Literary Award

Alistair MacLeod, No Great Mischief (2001)
Rawi Hage, De Niro's Game (2008)
Orange Prize

Anne Michaels, Fugitive Pieces (1997)
Carol Shields, Larry's Party (1998)
Commonwealth Writers' Prize

Olive Senior, Summer Lightning (1987)
Mordecai Richler, Solomon Gursky Was Here (1990)
Rohinton Mistry, Such a Long Journey (1991)
Rohinton Mistry, A Fine Balance (1996)
Austin Clarke, The Polished Hoe (2003)
Lawrence Hill, The Book of Negroes (2008)
Peace Prize of the German Book Trade

Margaret Atwood (2017)


== Awards ==
There are a number of notable Canadian awards for literature:

The Atlantic Writers Competition highlights talent across the Atlantic Provinces.
Books in Canada First Novel Award for the best first novel of the year
Canadian Authors Association Awards for Adult Literature, honouring works by Canadian writers that achieve excellence without sacrificing popular appeal since 1975
CBC Literary Awards
Canada Council Molson Prize for distinguished contributions to Canada's cultural and intellectual heritage
Danuta Gleed Literary Award for a first collection of short fiction by a Canadian author writing in English
Dayne Ogilvie Prize for an emerging writer in the lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender communities
Doug Wright Awards for graphic literature and novels
Floyd S. Chalmers Canadian Play Awards for best Canadian play staged by a Canadian theatre company
Hilary Weston Writers' Trust Prize for Nonfiction for best work of nonfiction
Gerald Lampert Award for the best new poet
Lane Anderson Award for best Canadian non-fiction science
Giller Prize for the best Canadian novel or book of short stories in English
Governor General's Awards for the best Canadian fiction, poetry, non-fiction, drama, and translation, in both English and French
Griffin Poetry Prize for the best book of poetry, one award each for a Canadian poet and an international poet
Indigenous Voices Awards for works of literature by First Nations, Métis and Inuit writers
Marian Engel Award for female writers in mid-career
Matt Cohen Award to honour a Canadian writer for a lifetime of distinguished achievement
Milton Acorn Poetry Awards for an outstanding "people's poet"
National Business Book Award
Paragraphe Hugh MacLennan Prize for Fiction
Pat Lowther Award for poetry written by a woman
International Council for Canadian Studies' Pierre Savard Award ( e.g. Faye Hammill for Literary Culture and Female Authorship in Canada)
Prix Aurora Awards for Canadian science fiction and fantasy, in English and French
RBC Bronwen Wallace Award for Emerging Writers
Rogers Writers' Trust Fiction Prize for the best work of fiction
Shaughnessy Cohen Award for Political Writing
Stephen Leacock Award For Humour
W.O. Mitchell Literary Prize for a writer who has made a distinguished lifetime contribution both to Canadian literature and to mentoring new writers
Room of One's Own Annual Award for poetry and literature
3-Day Novel Contest annual literary marathon, born in Canada
Writers' Trust Engel/Findley Award for a distinguished writer in mid-career
Writers' Trust / McClelland & Stewart Journey Prize
Awards For Children's and Young Adult Literature:

Young Adult Novel Prize of the Atlantic Writers Competition
R.Ross Annett Award for Children's Literature
Geoffrey Bilson Award for Historical Fiction
Ann Connor Brimer Award
Canadian Library Association Book of the Year Award for Children
CLA Young Adult Canadian Book Award
Sheila A. Egoff Children's Literature Prize
Elizabeth Mrazik-Cleaver Canadian Picture Book Award
Floyd S. Chalmers Award for Theatre for Young Adults
Amelia Frances Howard-Gibbon Illustrator's Award
Information Book of the Year
I0DE Book Award
Janet Savage Blachford Prize for Children's and Young Adult Literature
Max and Greta Ebel Memorial Award for Children's Writing
Norma Fleck Award for children's non-fiction
Governor-General's Awards for the best Canadian children's literature, text-based or illustrated, in both English and French
Vicky Metcalf Award for Children's Literature


== See also ==

By author: Canadian women; Acadians, Aboriginal peoples in Canada; Irish Canadians; Italian-Canadians:  South-Asian-Canadian
Literary period: "The Confederation Poets", "Canadian postmoderns" or "Canadian Poets Between the Wars."
Canadian poetry
Canadian science fiction
Lists of Canadian writers
Indigenous literatures in Canada
Latin American Canadians § Writers
Arab Canadians § Filmmakers and writers
Romani literature § Canada
The Canadian Centenary Series
Canada Reads
Basodee
Canadian content
Theatre of Canada
Cinema of Canada


== "Caribbean literature" vs. "West Indian literature" ==
As scholarship expands, there is debate about the correct term to use for literature that comes from the region. Both terms are often used interchangeably despite having different origins and referring to slightly different groups of people. Since so much of Caribbean identity is linked to "insidious racism" and "the justification of slave labor", it is usual to refer to the author of the piece for their identity preference.
West Indian is defined as coming from the "West Indies", which includes "the islands of the Caribbean" and was "used first [for] indigenous population, and subsequently both [for] settlers of European origin and of people of African origin brought to the area as slaves." West Indian can also refer to things that can be "traced back" to the West Indies but the creators "live elsewhere". West Indian "was a term coined by colonising European powers." Caribbean, on the other hand, is defined as "of the Caribbean...its people, and their cultures" only.
Further issues include language classifications like Creole Caribbean literature and Anglophone Caribbean literature. Different languages also make different references to the texts. While there is no terminology that is obsolete, the issue requires acknowledgement, since it is the literature of historically oppressed people. The Spanish Caribbean islands include Cuba, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, and Panama as well as the islands of Venezuela and the Caribbean coast of Colombia.


== Territories included in the category West Indian ==
The literature of Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, Curaçao, the Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Montserrat, Saint Martin, St Kitts and Nevis, St Lucia, St Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks and Caicos and the U.S. Virgin Islands would normally be considered to belong to the wider category of West Indian literature.


== Development of the concept of West Indian literature ==
The term "West Indies" first began to achieve wide currency in the 1950s, when writers such as Samuel Selvon, John Hearne, Edgar Mittelholzer, V. S. Naipaul, Andrew Salkey, and George Lamming began to be published in the United Kingdom. A sense of a single literature developing across the islands was also encouraged in the 1940s by the BBC radio programme Caribbean Voices, which featured stories and poems written by West Indian authors, recorded in London under the direction of founding producer Una Marson and later Henry Swanzy, and broadcast back to the islands. Magazines such as Kyk-Over-Al in Guyana, Bim in Barbados, and Focus in Jamaica, which published work by writers from across the region, also encouraged links and helped build an audience.
Many—perhaps most—West Indian writers have found it necessary to leave their home territories and base themselves in the United Kingdom, the United States, or Canada in order to make a living from their work—in some cases spending the greater parts of their careers away from the territories of their birth. Critics in their adopted territories might argue that, for instance, V. S. Naipaul ought to be considered a British writer instead of a Trinidadian writer, or Jamaica Kincaid and Paule Marshall American writers, but most West Indian readers and critics still consider these writers "West Indian".
West Indian literature ranges over subjects and themes as wide as those of any other "national" literature, but in general many West Indian writers share a special concern with questions of identity, ethnicity, and language that rise out of the Caribbean historical experience.

One unique and pervasive characteristic of Caribbean literature is the use of "dialect" forms of the national language, often termed creole. The various local variations in the language adopted from the colonial powers such as Britain, Spain, Portugal, France and the Netherlands, have been modified over the years within each country and each has developed a blend that is unique to their country. Many Caribbean authors in their writing switch liberally between the local variation—now commonly termed nation language—and the standard form of the language.
Two West Indian writers have won the Nobel Prize for literature: Derek Walcott (1992), born in St. Lucia, resident mostly in Trinidad during the 1960s and '70s, and partly in the United States since then; and V. S. Naipaul (2001), born in Trinidad and resident in the United Kingdom since 1950. (Saint-John Perse, who won the Nobel Prize in 1960, was born in the French territory of Guadeloupe.)
Other notable names in (anglophone) Caribbean literature have included Una Marson, Earl Lovelace, Austin Clarke, Claude McKay, Louise Bennett, Orlando Patterson, Andrew Salkey, Edward Kamau Brathwaite (who was born in Barbados and has lived in Ghana and Jamaica), Linton Kwesi Johnson, Velma Pollard and Michelle Cliff, to name only a few. In more recent times, a number of literary voices have emerged from the Caribbean as well as the Caribbean diaspora, including Kittitian Caryl Phillips (who has lived in the UK since one month of age); Edwidge Danticat, a Haitian immigrant to the United States; Anthony Kellman from Barbados, who divides his time between Barbados and the United States; Andrea Levy of the United Kingdom; Jamaicans Alecia McKenzie, who has lived in Belgium, Singapore and France, and Colin Channer and Marlon James, the author of the 2015 Man Booker Prize-winning novel A Brief History of Seven Killings (as well as John Crow's Devil, The Book of Night Women, the unpublished screenplay "Dead Men", and the short story "Under Cover of Darkness"), Antiguan Marie-Elena John, and Lasana M. Sekou from Saint Martin.


== Themes of migration, landscape, nature ==
Caribbean lands and seas have been depicted as a paradise on earth by foreign artists and writers. Scholars and writers in Postcolonial Studies have researched and published on this cultural phenomenon of an empty island, and the racist implications of a fantasy void of local people and their cultures. Caribbean classic novels such as Jean Rhys's Wide Sargasso Sea (1966) have inspired films, stories, and poems by other artists who seek to decolonize the relationship of people and landscapes.
Caribbean novelists imbue island landscape with bustling life of the locals and migrants. The migration of Caribbean workers to the Panama Canal is often used as a narrative foundation. Maryse Condé’s novel Tree of Life (1992) discusses the involvement of family ties and how people seek to improve their lot in life by working to build the Panama Canal. Another contemporary classic about migrant cultures is Ramabai Espinet’s novel The Swinging Bridge (2003), which explores trauma of displacement, Indian indentureship, and the phenomena of invisibility relating to women.
Caribbean stories and poems are ripe with references to storms, hurricanes, and natural disasters. Derek Walcott wrote "The Sea is History," and dramatized the impact of tropical storms and hurricanes on the locals.
Caribbean writing deploys agricultural symbolism to represent the complexities of colonial rule and the intrinsic values of the lands. Native fruits and vegetables appear in colonized and decolonizing discourse. Derek Walcott describes the complications of colonialism using local fruit metaphors, such as star apples, in his poetry to connote the complexity of acidity and the sweetness. Giannina Braschi's postcolonial work United States of Banana imagines a political and economic deal between China and Puerto Rico as the exchange of a bowl of rice for a bowl of beans, and a Lychee for a Quenepa.


== Poetry ==
Caribbean poetry is vast and rapidly evolving field of poetry written by people from the Caribbean region and the diaspora.
Caribbean poetry generally refers to a myriad of poetic forms, spanning epic, lyrical verse, prose poems, dramatic poetry and oral poetry, composed in Caribbean territories regardless of language. It is most often, however, written in English, Spanish, Spanglish, French, Hindustani, Dutch, or any number of creoles. Poetry in English from the former British West Indies has been referred to as Anglo-Caribbean poetry or West Indian poetry.
Since the mid-1970s, Caribbean poetry has gained increasing visibility with the publication in Britain and North America of several anthologies. Over the decades the canon has shifted and expanded, drawing both on oral and literary traditions and including more women poets and politically charged works. Caribbean writers, performance poets, newspaper poets, singer-songwriters have created a popular art form, a poetry heard by audiences all over the world. Caribbean oral poetry shares the vigour of the written tradition.
Among the most prominent Caribbean poets whose works are widely studied (and translated into other languages) are: Derek Walcott (who won the 1992 Nobel Prize for Literature), Kamau Brathwaite, Edouard Glissant, Giannina Braschi, Lorna Goodinson, Aimé Fernand Césaire, Linton Kwesi Johnson, Kwame Dawes, and Claudia Rankine.
Common themes include: exile and return to the motherland; the relationship of language to nation; colonialism and postcolonialism; self-determination and liberty; racial identity.


== Women writers ==
There is great abundance of talent, styles, and subjects covered by Caribbean women writers spanning the genres of poetry, theater, short stories, essays, and novels. There is also a burgeoning field of scholarship on how women authors address women's lives under dictatorships, eroticism and the body, history and identity, migration, Afro Caribbean history, decolonization, revolution, queer theory, among countless other topics.
Major novelists include Maryse Condé (Guadeloupe), Merle Hodge (Trinidad), Paule Marshall (Barbadian-American), Cynthia McLeod (Suriname), Astrid Roemer (Suriname) Elizabeth Nunez (Trinidad-American ), Tiphanie Yanique (Virgin Islands), Rosario Ferre, (Puerto Rico), and Michelle Cliff (Jamaica).
Poets include Mahadai Das (Guyana), Lenelle Moïse (Haiti), Nancy Morejón, Pamela Mordecai (Jamaica), Lorna Goodison (Jamaica), Julia de Burgos, Mara Pastor, Giannina Braschi (Puerto Rico), Merle Collins (Grenada), Shara McCallum (Jamaica), Chiqui Vicioso (Dominican Republic), Jennifer Rahim (Trinidad and Tobago), Olive Senior (Jamaica) and Yvonne Weekes [Montserrat/Barbados].
Playwrights include Una Marson who wrote in English, and Ina Césaire (Martinique) and Simone Schwarz-Bart (France/Guadeloupe) who write in French.


== Epics ==
There are many epic stories, plays, and poems written in and about the Caribbean. Dating to the 16th century, Juan de Castellanos's Elegy to the Illustrious Gentlemen of the Indies (1589) is an epic in verse that traces Columbus's arrival to the conquest of Cuba, Jamaica, Trinidad, and Margarita. The work relates Juan Ponce de León's colonization of Puerto Rico in search for the mythic fountain of youth. Later epics of the Spanish West Indies include Manuel de Jesus Galvan's national epic "The Sword and the Cross" (1954) that relates the myths and histories of the colony of Hispaniola.
In the 20th century, epics approach subjects such racist legacies, economic terrorism, and the decolonization of Caribbean culture and politics.  Nobel Prize winner Derek Walcott wrote Omeros (1990). This epic poem is divided into seven books containing sixty-four chapters. Most of the poem is composed in a three-line form that is reminiscent of the terza rima form that Dante used for The Divine Comedy. The work uses local island folklore and ancient Greek myths such as Homer' Iliad to address legacies of Greek, Roman, and American culture including racism and slavery. Parts of the story occur on Walcott's native island St. Lucia, but there are also time travels to ancient Greece and Rome, as well as travels to modern day Lisbon, London, Dublin, Toronto.
Giannina Braschi's Empire of Dreams (1988) is a postmodern epic composed of six books of poetry that blend elements of eclogues, epigrams, lyrics, prose poem, diary, jingles, Puerto Rican folklore, and political manifesto. The work traces the history of the Spanish language from medieval times to contemporary Puerto Rico, Cuban, Chicano, and Nuyorican culture. Braschi's later epic, written in English, is United States of Banana (2011), a geopolitical tragic-comedy about the fall of the American empire, the liberation of Puerto Rico, and the realignment of powers among Caribbean nations. Mixing elements of poetry, lyric essay, Caribbean songs, and socratic dialogues, this epic tackles the subjects of global debt, financial terrorism, and decolonization.
Trinidadian playwright and novelist Earl Lovelace's work has been described as performative epics that mix the rhythms of steelband and calypso with complex narratives about black power and the political, spiritual, and psychic struggles for decolonization. His best known works are The Dragon Can't Dance (1979) and Salt (1996) which won the Commonwealth Book Prize.


== Literary festivals ==
Many parts of the Caribbean have begun in recent years to host literary festivals, including in Anguilla, the Anguilla Lit Fest, in Cuba the Havana International Book Fair, in Trinidad and Tobago the NGC Bocas Lit Fest, in Jamaica the Calabash International Literary Festival, in Saint Martin/Sint Maarten the St. Martin Book Fair, in Barbados Bim Literary Festival, in the Dominican Republic the Santo Domingo International Book Fair, in Dominica the Nature Island Literary Festival and Book Fair, Alliouagana Festival of the Word in Montserrat, the Virgin Islands Literary Festival and Book Fair, the International Poetry Festival - Puerto Rico, and Antigua and Barbuda Literary Festival. The Caribbean Literature Day is celebrated annually on July 12, in the Caribbean region, across all language zones, and by Caribbean literature lovers worldwide.


== Prizes ==
The Frank Collymore Literary Endowment Prize
Casa de las Américas Prize
OCM Bocas Prize for Caribbean Literature
Grand Prize for Caribbean Literature, Association of Caribbean Writers (Guadeloupe)
Brooklyn Caribbean Literary Festival Elizabeth Nunez Award


== Notable West Indian writers ==
(Grouped by territory of birth or upbringing)


=== Antigua ===
Marie-Elena John
Jamaica Kincaid
Joanne C. Hillhouse


=== The Bahamas ===
Robert Antoni
Marion Bethel
Patricia Glinton-Meicholas


=== Barbados ===
Kamau Brathwaite
Austin Clarke
Frank Collymore
Geoffrey Drayton
Anthony Kellman
George Lamming
Karen Lord
Paule Marshall
Esther Phillips
Andrea Stuart
Cynthia Wilson


=== Belize ===
Zee Edgell
Evan X Hyde
Adele Ramos
Colville Young


=== Bonaire ===
Cola Debrot


=== Cuba ===
Antonio Benitez-Rojo
Guillermo Cabrera Infante
Alejo Carpentier
Roberto Fernández Retamar
Nicolás Guillén
Jorge Enrique González Pacheco
José Lezama Lima
Dulce María Loynaz
José Martí
Carlos Moore (writer)
Nancy Morejon
Leonardo Padura Fuentes
Virgilio Piñera
Emilio Jorge Rodríguez
Guillermo Rosales
Severo Sarduy


=== Curaçao ===
Frank Martinus Arion
Sonia Cuales
May Henriquez
Pierre Lauffer
Hemayel Martina
Tip Marugg
Nilda Pinto


=== Dominica ===
Phyllis Shand Allfrey
Lennox Honychurch
Elma Napier
Jean Rhys


=== Dominican Republic ===
Julia Alvarez
Julio Vega Battle
Raquel Cepeda
Junot Díaz
Blas Jiménez
Mateo Morrison
Chiqui Vicioso


=== Grenada ===
Jacob Ross
Tobias S. Buckell
Merle Collins
Gus John


=== Guadeloupe ===
Maryse Condé
Saint-John Perse
Gisèle Pineau
Max Rippon
Simone Schwarz-Bart


=== Guyana ===
John Agard
Gaiutra Bahadur
E. R. Braithwaite
Jan Carew
Martin Carter
Cyril Dabydeen
David Dabydeen
Fred D'Aguiar
O. R. Dathorne
Beryl Gilroy
Wilson Harris
Roy A. K. Heath
Ruel Johnson
Oonya Kempadoo
Peter Kempadoo
Sharon Maas
Yolanda T. Marshall
Mark McWatt
Pauline Melville
Edgar Mittelholzer
Grace Nichols
Walter Rodney
Gordon Rohlehr
A. J. Seymour
Jan Shinebourne
Eric Walrond
Denis Williams


=== Haiti ===
Edwidge Danticat
René Depestre
Marie Vieux-Chauvet
Myriam J. A. Chancy
Dany Laferrière
Dimitry Elias Léger
Jacques Roumain
Emeric Bergeaud
Frankétienne
Beaubrun Ardouin
Emile Nau
Ignace Nau
Lyonel Trouillot
René Philoctète
Marie-Célie Agnant


=== Jamaica ===
Louise Bennett-Coverley
James Berry
Erna Brodber
Margaret Cezair-Thompson
Colin Channer
Michelle Cliff
Kwame Dawes
Jean D'Costa
Herbert de Lisser
Ferdinand Dennis
Marcia Douglas
Gloria Escoffery
John Figueroa
Honor Ford-Smith
Lorna Goodison
Richard Hart
John Hearne
A. L. Hendriks
Nalo Hopkinson
Marlon James
Linton Kwesi Johnson
Roger Mais
Una Marson
Claude McKay
Alecia McKenzie
Anthony McNeill
Mervyn Morris
Mutabaruka
Rex Nettleford
Orlando Patterson
Geoffrey Philp
Velma Pollard
Patricia Powell
Claudia Rankine
Barry Reckord
V. S. Reid
Joan Riley
Trevor Rhone
Leone Ross
Andrew Salkey
Dennis Scott
Olive Senior
M. G. Smith
Mikey Smith
Anthony C. Winkler
Sylvia Wynter


=== Martinique ===
Jean Bernabé
Mayotte Capécia
Marie-Magdeleine Carbet
Aimé Césaire
Ina Césaire
Patrick Chamoiseau
Raphaël Confiant
Marie-Reine de Jaham
Suzanne Dracius
Françoise Ega
Frantz Fanon
Edouard Glissant
Simone Yoyotte
Joseph Zobel


=== Montserrat ===
Howard Fergus
E. A. Markham
Yvonne Weekes
Edgar Nkosi White


=== Puerto Rico ===
Giannina Braschi
Lola Rodríguez de Tió
Rosario Ferré
Juan Carlos Quintero Herencia
Eugenio María de Hostos
Luis Palés Matos
Julia de Burgos
Aurora Levins Morales
Manuel Ramos Otero
Luis Rafael Sánchez
Esmeralda Santiago
Mayra Santos-Febres
Ana Lydia Vega
José Luis Vega
Francisco Arrivi
René Marqués


=== St Kitts and Nevis ===
Cyril Briggs
Caryl Phillips


=== St Lucia ===
Kendel Hippolyte
Jane King
Vladimir Lucien
Derek Walcott


=== Saint Martin ===
Lasana M. Sekou


=== St Vincent and The Grenadines ===
Cecil Browne
Shake Keane
Philip Nanton


=== Suriname ===
Clark Accord
Albert Helman
Cynthia McLeod
Ismene Krishnadath


=== The British Virgin Islands ===
Richard Georges
Alphaeus Osario Norman
Patricia G. Turnbull


=== Trinidad and Tobago ===
James Christopher Aboud
Lisa Allen-Agostini
Lauren K. Alleyne
Michael Anthony
Robert Antoni
Kevin Baldeosingh
Dionne Brand
Brother Resistance
Lennox Brown
Wayne Brown
Vahni Capildeo
Meta Davis Cumberbatch
Ralph de Boissière
Ramabai Espinet
Albert Gomes
Cecil Gray
Rosa Guy
Errol Hill
Merle Hodge
C. L. R. James
Cynthia James
Anthony Joseph
Roi Kwabena
Harold "Sonny" Ladoo
John La Rose
Earl Lovelace
John Lyons
Rabindranath Maharaj
Mustapha Matura
Ian McDonald
Dionyse McTair
Alfred Mendes
Shani Mootoo
Shiva Naipaul
V. S. Naipaul
Elizabeth Nunez
Lakshmi Persaud
M. NourbeSe Philip
Jennifer Rahim
Kenneth Ramchand
Roger Robinson
Monique Roffey
Amon Saba Saakana
Lawrence Scott
Samuel Selvon
Frances-Anne Solomon
Eintou Pearl Springer
Kenneth Vidia Parmasad
Elizabeth Walcott-Hackshaw
Eric Williams


=== Virgin Islands ===
Kacen Callender
Cadwell Turnbull
Tiphanie Yanique


== West Indian literary periodicals ==
The Beacon (Trinidad)
Bim (Barbados)
DIALOGUE (Trinidad)
The Caribbean Writer (U. S. Virgin Islands)
Focus (Jamaica)
Kyk-Over-Al (Guyana)
The Caribbean Review of Books (Trinidad)
Savacou (journal of the Caribbean Artists Movement (London, UK)
Moko - Caribbean Arts and Letters (Virgin Islands)
Interviewing the Caribbean - letters and the visual arts (Jamaica)


== See also ==
American poetry
Caribbean poetry
Creole languages
Cuban literature
Dub poetry
Haitian literature
Postcolonial Literature
Postcolonial Studies


== Historical context ==
The term "Romanticism" comes from Old French "romanz," meaning stories written in the vernacular (local) "Roman" tongue (not Latin), which evolved from Latin "romanice" ("in the Roman manner"). Not only has it become an iconic style of art, but also had an effect on literature and music. It was driven by emotions and imagination rather than science and rationality. The Romantic Movement began in Europe at the end of the 18th century and migrated to America in the early 19th century. American Romanticism authors were most productive between 1830 and 1865. Within Romanticism, two conflicting sub-genres arose: optimists who believed in human virtue and spirituality formed the Transcendentalism Movement, while pessimists who accepted human fallibility and our proclivity for sin formed the Dark Romantic Movement.


== Definitions ==
Romanticism's celebration of euphoria and sublimity has always been dogged by an equally intense fascination with melancholia, insanity, crime and shady atmosphere; with the options of ghosts and ghouls, the grotesque, and the irrational. The name "Dark Romanticism" was given to this form by the literary theorist Mario Praz in his lengthy study of the genre published in 1930, The Romantic Agony.
According to the critic G. R. Thompson, "the Dark Romantics adapted images of anthropomorphized evil in the form of Satan, devils, ghosts, werewolves, vampires, and ghouls" as emblematic of human nature. Thompson sums up the characteristics of the sub-genre, writing:

Fallen man's inability fully to comprehend haunting reminders of another, supernatural realm that yet seemed not to exist, the constant perplexity of inexplicable and vastly metaphysical phenomena, a propensity for seemingly perverse or evil moral choices that had no firm or fixed measure or rule, and a sense of nameless guilt combined with a suspicion the external world was a delusive projection of the mind—these were major elements in the vision of man the Dark Romantics opposed to the mainstream of Romantic thought.


=== Example quote ===
"Cannibals? Who is not a cannibal? I tell you it will be more tolerable for the Fejee that salted down a lean missionary in his cellar against a coming famine; it will be more tolerable for that provident Fejee, I say, in the day of judgement, than for thee, civilized and enlightened gourmand, who nailest geese to the ground and feastest on their bloated livers in thy pate de fois gras.” – Herman Melville's Moby Dick: or The Whale


== Characteristics ==
To fully grasp the idea of dark romanticism, we must recognize the attributes that come with the artwork so we can identify them. The characteristics that define dark romanticism are questioning the natural perfection of man, believing that man cannot ever be perfect, that man will never have perfection. People began to have a less conventional perspective of religion, to pay greater attention to catastrophes, and to let the investigation into terrible realities into their daily life.
Furthermore, the most popular notions are that humans are naturally subject to sin and destruction, that people cannot ever escape sin or be rescued from it, and that people may destroy society, religions, and themselves.


== Artists' impact ==
Loneliness and sadness, desire and death, the obsession with horror, and the absurdity of dreams are all themes explored in the artwork. Artists like Salvador Dalí, René Magritte, Paul Klee, and Max Ernst continued to think in this spirit throughout the twentieth century. Dark Romanticism arose as a reaction to the Enlightenment, the Industrial Revolution, and widespread rationalization, emphasizing raw emotion, pure aesthetic experiences, and other types of extreme emotion.


=== Artists ===


==== Johann Heinrich Fuseli ====

In Switzerland, Johann Heinrich Fuseli had studied to be an evangelical preacher. He produced an emblem of Dark Romanticism with his artwork. This piece leads off the exhibit, which spans two levels of the temporary exhibition space. The appearance of the incubus and the lecherous horse in a scenario situated in the present, shocked Fuseli's contemporaries greatly. Furthermore, the voyeur's requirements were met by the erotic-compulsive and daemonic material, as well as the sad environment.


==== William Blake ====

This painting reflects the conflict between good and evil, misery and lust, light and darkness, and other aspects of his work. Fuseli's unique pictorial language impacted a number of painters, including William Blake, whose famous watercolor The Great Red Dragon is on display at the Brooklyn Museum.


==== Francisco Goya ====

One of the most significant individuals in Spanish painting was Francisco Goya. He was also a precursor of Romanticism in the creation of contemporary artistic appreciation, both in terms of the substance of his paintings, with their in-depth examination of reality and references to the dream realm, and in terms of his innovative technique. His art expresses his own innovative views, opposing academicism and established topics. Goya characterized himself as a student of Velazquez, Rembrandt, and nature, gaining a taste for delicately shaded color applied in layers from Velazquez, a preference for dark and enigmatic backdrop settings from Rembrandt, and an unending diversity of shapes from nature; some beautiful, others ugly.


==== John Constable ====

The goal of John Constable's landscape paintings was to represent nature with honesty, to convey its beauty and simplicity without becoming pretentious. He is not the personification of nature's passion, poetry, or sorrow. He thought his life and art were in ruins, so he looked for a glimpse of his own spirit in nature, which he discovered in a bleak landscape of Hadleigh Castle in Essex.


==== Eugène Delacroix ====

Delacroix is usually considered as the founder of the Romantic movement in French painting throughout the nineteenth century. His painting technique – full of rich, agitated brushwork and throbbing with vibrant color – expressed the movement's concern for emotion, exoticism, and the sublime, and his life and work embodied the movement's concern for passion, exoticism, and the sublime.


== Timeline ==
The American Renaissance (literature) was between 1840 and 1860. This included Dark Romanticism and Transcendentalism.
Since it allowed for the study of gloomy ideas, writing, and topics, Dark Romanticism had a huge effect on American literature.
Dark Romanticism began as a response to the Transcendental movement of the mid-nineteenth century. This was a mental shift in thinking from rigid religious Puritan thought to a dark, immoral point of view. People were disinterested in optimism when they considered their sin and human nature.
Authors and artists were not afraid to express their sinister side. Authors began to investigate man's wicked nature even before 1840.
1809 – Edgar Allan Poe was born in Boston, Massachusetts. Poe is probably one of the most influential writers of this time. His themes focused on human sin and the evil in man.
Herman Melville – another influential writer, but he is completely different in his writing from Poe and Hawthorne. His themes focus on "the truths of ragged edges"
From 1840 to the late 1870s, Dark Romanticism dominated literature and art.
The primary element employed was symbolism. They would symbolize man's bad side and "study human nature's difficulties." Artists sought to show how evil, rather than virtue, consumes people, and how individual acts lead to self-destruction.


== 18th-/19th-century movements in national literatures ==
Elements of Dark Romanticism were a perennial possibility within the broader international movement of Romanticism, in both literature and art.


=== Germany ===
Dark Romanticism arguably began in Germany, with writers such as E. T. A. Hoffmann, and Ludwig Tieck, and also pre-Romantic figure of Christian Heinrich Spiess, — though their emphasis on existential alienation, the demonic in sex, and the uncanny, was offset at the same time by the more homely cult of Biedermeier.
Like the Gothic novel, Schwarze Romantik is a genre based on the terrifying side of the Middle Ages, and frequently feature the same elements (castles, ghost, monster, etc.). However, Schauerroman's key elements are necromancy and secret societies, and it is remarkably more pessimistic than the English Gothic novel. All those elements are the basis for Friedrich Schiller's unfinished novel The Ghost-Seer (1786–1789). The motive of secret societies is also present in Karl Grosse's Horrid Mysteries (1791–1794) and Christian August Vulpius' The History of Rinaldo Rinaldini (1798). Benedikte Naubert's novel Hermann of Unna (1788) is seen as being very close to the Schauerroman genre.
Other early authors and works included Christian Heinrich Spiess, with his works Das Petermännchen (1793), Der alte Überall und Nirgends (1792), Die Löwenritter (1794), and Hans Heiling, vierter und letzter Regent der Erd- Luft- Feuer- und Wasser-Geister (1798); Heinrich von Kleist's short story "Das Bettelweib von Locarno" (1797); and Ludwig Tieck's Der blonde Eckbert (1797) and Der Runenberg (1804).


==== Jüngere Romantik ====
For two decades, the most famous author of Gothic literature in Germany was the polymath E. T. A. Hoffmann. His novel The Devil's Elixirs (1815) was influenced by Lewis's The Monk and even mentions it. The novel also explores the motive of Doppelgänger, the term coined by another German author and supporter of Hoffmann, Jean Paul, in his humorous novel Siebenkäs (1796–1797).  Aside from Hoffmann and de la Motte Fouqué, three other important authors from the era were Joseph Freiherr von Eichendorff (The Marble Statue, 1818), Ludwig Achim von Arnim (Die Majoratsherren, 1819), and Adelbert von Chamisso (Peter Schlemihls wundersame Geschichte, 1814). After them, Wilhelm Meinhold wrote The Amber Witch (1838) and Sidonia von Bork (1847). The last work from the German writer Theodor Storm, The Rider on the White Horse (1888), uses Gothic motives and themes.


=== Britain ===
British authors such as Lord Byron, Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Mary Shelley, and John William Polidori, who are frequently linked to Gothic fiction, are also sometimes referred to as Dark Romantics. Dark Romanticism is characterized by stories of personal torment, social outcasts, and usually offers commentary on whether the nature of man will save or destroy him. Some authors of English and Irish horror fiction, such as Bram Stoker and Daphne du Maurier, follow in this lineage.


=== American ===
The American form of this sensibility centered on the writers Edgar Allan Poe, Nathaniel Hawthorne and Herman Melville, with Charles Brockden Brown being a predecessor. As opposed to the perfectionist beliefs of Transcendentalism, these darker contemporaries emphasized human fallibility and proneness to sin and self-destruction, as well as the difficulties inherent in attempts at social reform.


=== France ===

The 19th-century fantastique literature after 1830 was dominated by the influence of E. T. A. Hoffmann, and then by that of Edgar Allan Poe. French authors such as Jules Barbey d'Aurevilly, Charles Baudelaire, Paul Verlaine and Arthur Rimbaud echoed the dark themes found in the German and English literature. Baudelaire was one of the first French writers to admire Edgar Allan Poe, but this admiration or even adulation of Poe became widespread in French literary circles in the late 19th century.


== See also ==


== Historical context ==
Elizabeth I presided over a vigorous culture that saw notable accomplishments in the arts, voyages of discovery, the "Elizabethan Settlement" that created the Church of England, and the defeat of military threats from Spain.
During her reign, a London-centred culture, both courtly and popular, produced great poetry and drama. English playwrights combined the influence of the Medieval theatre with the Renaissance's rediscovery of the Roman dramatists, Seneca, for tragedy, and Plautus and Terence, for comedy. Italy was an important source for Renaissance ideas in England and the linguist and lexicographer John Florio (1553–1625), whose father was Italian, a royal language tutor at the Court of James I, who had furthermore brought much of the Italian language and culture to England. He also translated the works of Montaigne from French into English.


== Prose ==
Two of the most important Elizabethan prose writers were John Lyly (1553 or 1554–1606) and Thomas Nashe (November 1567 – c. 1601). Lyly is an English writer, poet, dramatist, playwright, and politician, best known for his books Euphues: The Anatomy of Wit (1578) and Euphues and His England (1580). Lyly's mannered literary style, originating in his first books, is known as euphuism. Lyly must also be considered and remembered as a primary influence on the plays of William Shakespeare, and in particular the romantic comedies. Lyly's play Love's Metamorphosis is a large influence on Love's Labour's Lost, and Gallathea is a possible source for other plays. Nashe is considered the greatest of the English Elizabethan pamphleteers. He was a playwright, poet and satirist, who is best known for his novel The Unfortunate Traveller.
George Puttenham (1529–1590) was a 16th-century English writer and literary critic. He is generally considered to be the author of the influential handbook on poetry and rhetoric, The Arte of English Poesie (1589).


== Poetry ==

Italian literature was an important influence on the poetry of Thomas Wyatt (1503–42), one of the earliest English Renaissance poets. He was responsible for many innovations in English poetry, and alongside Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey (1516/1517–47), introduced the sonnet from Italy into England in the early 16th century. Wyatt's professed object was to experiment with the English tongue, to civilise it, to raise its powers to those of its neighbours.  While a significant amount of his literary output consists of translations and imitations of sonnets by the Italian poet Petrarch, he also wrote sonnets of his own.  Wyatt took subject matter from Petrarch's sonnets, but his rhyme schemes make a significant departure. Petrarchan sonnets start with an octave (eight lines), rhyming ABBA ABBA. A (volta) occurs (a dramatic turn in the sense), and the next lines are a sestet with various rhyme schemes. Petrarch's poems never ended in a rhyming couplet.  Wyatt employs the Petrarchan octave, but his most common sestet rhyme scheme is CDDC EE. This marks the beginnings of  the English sonnet with three quatrains and a closing couplet.
In the later 16th century, English poetry was characterised by elaboration of language and extensive allusion to classical myths. The most important poets of this era include Edmund Spenser and Sir Philip Sidney. Elizabeth herself, a product of Renaissance humanism, produced occasional poems such as "On Monsieur's Departure" and "The Doubt of Future Foes".
Edmund Spenser (c. 1552–99) was one of the most important poets of this period, author of The Faerie Queene (1590 and 1596), an epic poem and fantastical allegory celebrating the Tudor dynasty and Elizabeth I. Another major figure, Sir Philip Sidney (1554–86), was an English poet, courtier and soldier, and is remembered as one of the most prominent figures of the Elizabethan age. His works include Astrophel and Stella, An Apology for Poetry, and The Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia. Poems intended to be set to music as songs, such as by Thomas Campion (1567–1620), became popular as printed literature was disseminated more widely in households. See English Madrigal School.
Shakespeare also popularised the English sonnet, which made significant changes to Petrarch's model.


=== Changes to the canon ===
While the canon of Renaissance English poetry of the 16th century has always been in some form of flux, it is only towards the late 20th century that concerted efforts were made to challenge the canon. Questions that once did not even have to be made, such as where to put the limitations of periods, what geographical areas to include, what genres to include, what writers and what kinds of writers to include, are now central.
The central figures of the Elizabethan canon are Spenser, Sidney, Christopher Marlowe, Shakespeare, and Ben Jonson. There have been few attempts to change this long established list because the cultural importance of these five is so great that even re-evaluations on grounds of literary merit have not dared to dislodge them from the curriculum. Spenser, for example, had a significant influence on 17th-century poetry and was the primary English influence on John Milton.
In the 18th century, interest in Elizabethan poetry was rekindled through the scholarship of Thomas Warton and others.
The Lake Poets and other Romantics, at the beginning of the 19th century, were well-read in Renaissance poetry. However, the canon of Renaissance poetry was formed only in the Victorian period, with anthologies like Palgrave's Golden Treasury. A fairly representative idea of the "Victorian canon" is also given by Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch's Oxford Book of English Verse (1919). The poems from this period are largely songs and apart from the major names, one sees the two pioneers Wyatt and Surrey, and a scattering of poems by other writers of the period. However, the authors of many poems are anonymous. Some poems, such as Thomas Sackville's Induction to The Mirror for Magistrates, were highly regarded (and therefore "in the canon") but they were omitted from the anthology as non-lyric.
In the 20th century T. S. Eliot's many essays on Elizabethan subjects were mainly concerned with Elizabethan theatre, but he also attempted to bring back long-forgotten poets to general attention, like Sir John Davies, whose cause he championed in an article in The Times Literary Supplement in 1926 (republished in On Poetry and Poets in 1957).
In 1939, American critic Yvor Winters suggested an alternative canon of Elizabethan poetry, in which he excluded the famous representatives of the Petrarchan school of poetry, represented by Sidney and Spenser. Instead, he focused on the "native or plain-style" anti-Petrarchan movement, which he argued had been overlooked and undervalued. The most underrated member of this movement he deems to have been George Gascoigne (1525–1577), who "deserves to be ranked ... among the six or seven greatest lyric poets of the century, and perhaps higher". Other members were Sir Walter Raleigh (1552–1618), Thomas Nashe (1567–1601), Barnabe Googe (1540–1594), and George Turberville (1540–1610). Winters characterised such anti-Petrarchan poems as having "broad, simple, and obvious" themes that border on "proverbial" as well as a restrained, aphoristic style; such a poet would "stat[e] his matter as economically as possible, and not, as are the Petrarchans, in the pleasures of rhetoric for its own sake".
Both Eliot and Winters were much in favour of the established canon. Towards the end of the 20th century, however, the established canon was criticised, especially by those who wished to expand it to include, for example, more women writers.


== Theatre ==

The Italian Renaissance had rediscovered the ancient Greek and Roman theatre. This revival of interest was instrumental in the development of the new drama, which was then beginning to make apart from the old mystery and miracle plays of the Middle Ages. The Italians were inspired by Seneca (a major tragic playwright and philosopher, the tutor of Nero) and by Plautus (whose comic clichés, especially that of the boasting soldier, had a powerful influence during the Renaissance and thereafter).  However, the Italian tragedies embraced a principle contrary to Seneca's ethics: showing blood and violence on the stage. In Seneca's plays such scenes were only acted by the characters.

During the reign of Elizabeth I (1558–1603) and then James I (1603–25), in the late 16th and early 17th centuries, a London-centred culture, that was both courtly and popular, produced great poetry and drama. The English playwrights were intrigued by the Italian model: a conspicuous community of Italian actors had settled in London. The linguist and lexicographer John Florio (1553–1625), whose father was Italian, was a royal language tutor at the Court of James I, and a possible friend and influence on William Shakespeare, had brought much of the Italian language and culture to England. He was also the translator of Montaigne into English. The earliest Elizabethan plays include Gorboduc (1561), by Sackville and Norton, and Thomas Kyd's (1558–94) revenge tragedy The Spanish Tragedy (1592). Highly popular and influential in its time, The Spanish Tragedy established a new genre in English literature theatre, the revenge play or revenge tragedy. Its plot contains several violent murders and includes as one of its characters a personification of Revenge. The Spanish Tragedy was often referred to, or parodied, in works written by other Elizabethan playwrights, including William Shakespeare, Ben Jonson, and Christopher Marlowe. Many elements of The Spanish Tragedy, such as the play-within-a-play used to trap a murderer and a ghost intent on vengeance, appear in Shakespeare's Hamlet. Thomas Kyd is frequently proposed as the author of the hypothetical Ur-Hamlet that may have been one of Shakespeare's primary sources for Hamlet.
Jane Lumley (1537–1578) was the first person to translate Euripides into English. Her translation of Iphigeneia at Aulis is the first known dramatic work by a woman in English.
William Shakespeare (1564–1616) stands out in this period both as a poet and playwright. Shakespeare wrote plays in a variety of genres, including histories, tragedies, comedies and the late romances, or tragicomedies. His early classical and Italianate comedies, like A Comedy of Errors, containing tight double plots and precise comic sequences, give way in the mid-1590s to the romantic atmosphere of his greatest comedies, A Midsummer Night's Dream, Much Ado About Nothing, As You Like It, and  Twelfth Night. After the lyrical Richard II, written almost entirely in verse, Shakespeare introduced prose comedy into the histories of the late 1590s, Henry IV, parts 1 and 2, and Henry V. This period begins and ends with two tragedies: Romeo and Juliet,  and Julius Caesar, based on Sir Thomas North's 1579 translation of Plutarch's Parallel Lives, which introduced a new kind of drama.
Shakespeare's career continued into the Jacobean period, and in the early 17th century Shakespeare wrote the so-called "problem plays", Measure for Measure, Troilus and Cressida, and All's Well That Ends Well, as well as a number of his best known tragedies, including Hamlet, Othello, Macbeth, King Lear and Anthony and Cleopatra. The plots of Shakespeare's tragedies often hinge on such fatal errors or flaws, which overturn order and destroy the hero and those he loves. In his final period, Shakespeare turned to romance or tragicomedy and completed three more major plays: Cymbeline, The Winter's Tale and The Tempest, as well as the collaboration, Pericles, Prince of Tyre. Less bleak than the tragedies, these four plays are graver in tone than the comedies of the 1590s, but they end with reconciliation and the forgiveness of potentially tragic errors. Shakespeare collaborated on two further surviving plays, Henry VIII and The Two Noble Kinsmen, probably with John Fletcher.
Other important figures in the Elizabethan theatre include Christopher Marlowe and Thomas Dekker.
Marlowe's (1564–1593) subject matter is different from Shakespeare's as it focuses more on the moral drama of the Renaissance man than any other thing. Drawing on German folklore, Marlowe introduced the story of Faust to England in his play Doctor Faustus (c. 1592), about a scientist and magician who, obsessed by the thirst of knowledge and the desire to push man's technological power to its limits, sells his soul to the Devil. Faustus makes use of "the dramatic framework of the morality plays in its presentation of a story of temptation, fall, and damnation, and its free use of morality figures such as the good angel and the bad angel and the seven deadly sins, along with the devils Lucifer and Mephistopheles."
Thomas Dekker (c. 1570–1632) was, between 1598 and 1602, involved in about forty plays, usually in collaboration. He is particularly remembered for The Shoemaker's Holiday (1599), a work where he appears to be  the sole author. Dekker is noted for his "realistic portrayal of daily London life" and for "his sympathy for the poor and oppressed".
Robert Greene (c. 1558–1592) was another popular dramatist but he is now best known for a posthumous pamphlet attributed to him, Greenes, Groats-worth of Witte, bought with a million of Repentance, widely believed to contain an attack on William Shakespeare.


== List of other writers ==
List of other of the writers born in this period:

John Donne (1572–1631)
Ben Jonson (1572–1637)
Thomas Middleton (1580–1627)
John Webster (c. 1580–c. 1634)


== See also ==
English Renaissance theatre
Jacobean literature
Pamphlet wars
Renaissance literature


=== Works cited ===

---
